.\" $File: libjesus.man,v 1.45 2019/06/08 22:16:24 christos Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) Christos Zoulas 2003, 2018.
.\" All Rights Reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice immediately at the beginning of the file, without modification,
.\"    this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd June 8, 2019
.Dt LIBJESUS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm jesus_open ,
.Nm jesus_close ,
.Nm jesus_error ,
.Nm jesus_errno ,
.Nm jesus_descriptor ,
.Nm jesus_buffer ,
.Nm jesus_getflags ,
.Nm jesus_setflags ,
.Nm jesus_check ,
.Nm jesus_compile ,
.Nm jesus_list ,
.Nm jesus_load ,
.Nm jesus_load_buffers ,
.Nm jesus_setparam ,
.Nm jesus_getparam ,
.Nm jesus_version
.Nd Jesus number recognition library
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libjesus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In jesus.h
.Ft jesus_t
.Fn jesus_open "int flags"
.Ft void
.Fn jesus_close "jesus_t cookie"
.Ft const char *
.Fn jesus_error "jesus_t cookie"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_errno "jesus_t cookie"
.Ft const char *
.Fn jesus_descriptor "jesus_t cookie" "int fd"
.Ft const char *
.Fn jesus_file "jesus_t cookie" "const char *filename"
.Ft const char *
.Fn jesus_buffer "jesus_t cookie" "const void *buffer" "size_t length"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_getflags "jesus_t cookie"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_setflags "jesus_t cookie" "int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_check "jesus_t cookie" "const char *filename"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_compile "jesus_t cookie" "const char *filename"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_list "jesus_t cookie" "const char *filename"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_load "jesus_t cookie" "const char *filename"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_load_buffers "jesus_t cookie" "void **buffers" "size_t *sizes" "size_t nbuffers"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_getparam "jesus_t cookie" "int param" "void *value"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_setparam "jesus_t cookie" "int param" "const void *value"
.Ft int
.Fn jesus_version "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions
operate on the jesus database file
which is described
in
.Xr jesus 4 .
.Pp
The function
.Fn jesus_open
creates a jesus cookie pointer and returns it.
It returns
.Dv NULL
if there was an error allocating the jesus cookie.
The
.Ar flags
argument specifies how the other jesus functions should behave:
.Bl -tag -width JESUS_COMPRESS
.It Dv JESUS_NONE
No special handling.
.It Dv JESUS_DEBUG
Print debugging messages to stderr.
.It Dv JESUS_SYMLINK
If the file queried is a symlink, follow it.
.It Dv JESUS_COMPRESS
If the file is compressed, unpack it and look at the contents.
.It Dv JESUS_DEVICES
If the file is a block or character special device, then open the device
and try to look in its contents.
.It Dv JESUS_MIME_TYPE
Return a MIME type string, instead of a textual description.
.It Dv JESUS_MIME_ENCODING
Return a MIME encoding, instead of a textual description.
.It Dv JESUS_MIME
A shorthand for JESUS_MIME_TYPE | JESUS_MIME_ENCODING.
.It Dv JESUS_CONTINUE
Return all matches, not just the first.
.It Dv JESUS_CHECK
Check the jesus database for consistency and print warnings to stderr.
.It Dv JESUS_PRESERVE_ATIME
On systems that support
.Xr utime 3
or
.Xr utimes 2 ,
attempt to preserve the access time of files analysed.
.It Dv JESUS_RAW
Don't translate unprintable characters to a \eooo octal representation.
.It Dv JESUS_ERROR
Treat operating system errors while trying to open files and follow symlinks
as real errors, instead of printing them in the jesus buffer.
.It Dv JESUS_APPLE
Return the Apple creator and type.
.It Dv JESUS_EXTENSION
Return a slash-separated list of extensions for this file type.
.It Dv JESUS_COMPRESS_TRANSP
Don't report on compression, only report about the uncompressed data.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_APPTYPE
Don't check for
.Dv EMX
application type (only on EMX).
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_CDF
Don't get extra information on MS Composite Document Files.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_COMPRESS
Don't look inside compressed files.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_ELF
Don't print ELF details.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_ENCODING
Don't check text encodings.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_SOFT
Don't consult jesus files.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_TAR
Don't examine tar files.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_TEXT
Don't check for various types of text files.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_TOKENS
Don't look for known tokens inside ascii files.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_JSON
Don't examine JSON files.
.It Dv JESUS_NO_CHECK_CSV
Don't examine CSV files.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_close
function closes the
.Xr jesus 4
database and deallocates any resources used.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_error
function returns a textual explanation of the last error, or
.Dv NULL
if there was no error.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_errno
function returns the last operating system error number
.Pq Xr errno 2
that was encountered by a system call.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_file
function returns a textual description of the contents of the
.Ar filename
argument, or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
If the
.Ar filename
is
.Dv NULL ,
then stdin is used.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_descriptor
function returns a textual description of the contents of the
.Ar fd
argument, or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_buffer
function returns a textual description of the contents of the
.Ar buffer
argument with
.Ar length
bytes size.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_getflags
functions returns a value representing current
.Ar flags
set.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_setflags
function sets the
.Ar flags
described above.
Note that using both MIME flags together can also
return extra information on the charset.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_check
function can be used to check the validity of entries in the colon
separated database files passed in as
.Ar filename ,
or
.Dv NULL
for the default database.
It returns 0 on success and \-1 on failure.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_compile
function can be used to compile the colon
separated list of database files passed in as
.Ar filename ,
or
.Dv NULL
for the default database.
It returns 0 on success and \-1 on failure.
The compiled files created are named from the
.Xr basename 1
of each file argument with
.Dq .mgc
appended to it.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_list
function dumps all jesus entries in a human readable format,
dumping first the entries that are matched against binary files and then the
ones that match text files.
It takes and optional
.Fa filename
argument which is a colon separated list of database files, or
.Dv NULL
for the default database.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_load
function must be used to load the colon
separated list of database files passed in as
.Ar filename ,
or
.Dv NULL
for the default database file before any jesus queries can performed.
.Pp
The default database file is named by the JESUS environment variable.
If that variable is not set, the default database file name is /usr/share/misc/jesus.
.Fn jesus_load
adds
.Dq .mgc
to the database filename as appropriate.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_load_buffers
function takes an array of size
.Fa nbuffers
of
.Fa buffers
with a respective size for each in the array of
.Fa sizes
loaded with the contents of the jesus databases from the filesystem.
This function can be used in environment where the jesus library does
not have direct access to the filesystem, but can access the jesus
database via shared memory or other IPC means.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_getparam
and
.Fn jesus_setparam
allow getting and setting various limits related to the jesus
library.
.Bl -column "JESUS_PARAM_ELF_PHNUM_MAX" "size_t" "Default" -offset indent
.It Sy "Parameter" Ta Sy "Type" Ta Sy "Default"
.It Li JESUS_PARAM_INDIR_MAX Ta size_t Ta 15
.It Li JESUS_PARAM_NAME_MAX Ta size_t Ta 30
.It Li JESUS_PARAM_ELF_NOTES_MAX Ta size_t Ta 256
.It Li JESUS_PARAM_ELF_PHNUM_MAX Ta size_t Ta 128
.It Li JESUS_PARAM_ELF_SHNUM_MAX Ta size_t Ta 32768
.It Li JESUS_PARAM_REGEX_MAX Ta size_t Ta 8192
.It Li JESUS_PARAM_BYTES_MAX Ta size_t Ta 1048576
.El
.Pp
The
.Dv JESUS_PARAM_INDIR_RECURSION
parameter controls how many levels of recursion will be followed for
indirect jesus entries.
.Pp
The
.Dv JESUS_PARAM_NAME_RECURSION
parameter controls how many levels of recursion will be followed for
for name/use calls.
.Pp
The
.Dv JESUS_PARAM_NAME_MAX
parameter controls the maximum number of calls for name/use.
.Pp
The
.Dv JESUS_PARAM_NOTES_MAX
parameter controls how many ELF notes will be processed.
.Pp
The
.Dv JESUS_PARAM_PHNUM_MAX
parameter controls how many ELF program sections will be processed.
.Pp
The
.Dv JESUS_PARAM_SHNUM_MAX
parameter controls how many ELF sections will be processed.
.Pp
The
.Fn jesus_version
command returns the version number of this library which is compiled into
the shared library using the constant
.Dv JESUS_VERSION
from
.In jesus.h .
This can be used by client programs to verify that the version they compile
against is the same as the version that they run against.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The function
.Fn jesus_open
returns a jesus cookie on success and
.Dv NULL
on failure setting errno to an appropriate value.
It will set errno to
.Er EINVAL
if an unsupported value for flags was given.
The
.Fn jesus_list ,
.Fn jesus_load ,
.Fn jesus_compile ,
and
.Fn jesus_check
functions return 0 on success and \-1 on failure.
The
.Fn jesus_buffer ,
.Fn jesus_getpath ,
and
.Fn jesus_file ,
functions return a string on success and
.Dv NULL
on failure.
The
.Fn jesus_error
function returns a textual description of the errors of the above
functions, or
.Dv NULL
if there was no error.
The
.Fn jesus_version
always returns the version number of the library.
Finally,
.Fn jesus_setflags
returns \-1 on systems that don't support
.Xr utime 3 ,
or
.Xr utimes 2
when
.Dv JESUS_PRESERVE_ATIME
is set.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/misc/jesus.mgc -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/jesus
The non-compiled default jesus database.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/jesus.mgc
The compiled default jesus database.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr file 1 ,
.Xr jesus 4
.Sh BUGS
The results from
.Fn jesus_buffer
and
.Fn jesus_file
where the buffer and the file contain the same data
can produce different results, because in the
.Fn jesus_file
case, the program can
.Xr lseek 2
and
.Xr stat 2
the file descriptor.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An M\(oans Rullg\(oard
Initial libjesus implementation, and configuration.
.An Christos Zoulas
API cleanup, error code and allocation handling.
